@document.meta
title: README
description: 
authors: dfg
categories: 
created: 2025-12-22T21:48:23+0530
updated: 2025-12-22T22:35:23+0530
version: 1.1.1
@end

* Hi there future me!!
  It is 22nd of Dec in the year of 2025 AD,
  I have started a giagantic task of making a computer system on my own, 
  ofcourse I have the internet to help me, But There are some rules for this project.

** Rules
   1. No use of LLMs or AI-agents.
   2. Every line of code has to have a purpose, No place for dead code.
   3. Keep amount code to a minimum.

* Goals
  The primary goal for this project is to make a RISC-V computer that can run 1993 DOOM on it.
  I have decided to devide this project into 3 steps

  1. The Emulator
  2. The Kernel
  3. The shell
  4. DOOM

** IronClad (The Emulator)
   - *_Goal_*: A cycle-accurate (or near-accurate) RV32I executor.
   - *_The Outcome_*: The emulator loads a .bin file into virtual RAM, points the PC (Program Counter) to the start,
     and executes instructions until it hits a HALT signal.
   - *_Success Metric_*: You can run a "Prime Number Generator" written in Assembly/C
     and see the correct result in the virtual registers or printed to your terminal via a virtual UART.

** Rusty Iron Kernel
  - *_Goal_*: A "Supervisor" that manages hardware resources.
  - *_The OutCome_*: The kernel boots, sets up the Trap Vector Table (to handle errors),
    and initializes a Heap Allocator (so you can use Vec, Box, etc. in Rust).
  - *_Success Metric_*: The kernel can successfully handle a "Timer Interrupt"—meaning it can keep track
    of time and switch between two different "tasks" (Multitasking).

** Iron Shell (ish)
  - *_Goal_*: An interactive command-line interface running in "User Mode."
  - *_The Outcome_*: A prompt appears in your terminal. It listens for keyboard input, parses strings,
    and triggers System Calls to the Kernel.
  - *_Success Metric_*: Typing help shows a list of commands, and typing exec <program> loads a separate binary
    from "disk" into memory and runs it.

** Iron DOOM
  - *_Goal_*: The ultimate validation of the Iron-Stack.
  - *_The Outcome_*: The IronClad emulator provides a Framebuffer (a window on your Arch Linux desktop).
    RustyIron provides the memory and file-reading hooks.
  - *_Success Metric_*: Seeing the DOOM title screen render at a playable frame rate
    with keyboard input mapped to the emulator's virtual input device.
