@document.meta
title: {TODAY_DATE} - RISC-V Dev Dump
description: Informal logs and register-level troubleshooting
authors: {USER}
categories: [dev-log, riscv, low-level]
created: {TODAY_DATE}
updated: {TODAY_DATE}
version: 1.1.1
@end

* Daily Objective
  - ( ) Write a spec for hardware repsentaion in Rust.

---

* The Brain Dump
  Today I have to write a spec sheet for how we should represent the hardware stuff
  like CPU, RAM, etc. in code.
  As we discussed yesterday, we are going with a BUS design to saperate the memory and storage stuff
  from the proccessors.
  So first How should I structure the files in rust?

  @code bash 
  .
  |_src
  | |_cpu
  | | |_mod.rs
  | |_bus
  | | |_mod.rs
  | | |_ram.rs
  | |_models
  |   |_mod.rs
  |   |_cpu.rs
  |_Cargo.toml
  |_main.rs
  @end

  This is the best way to deal with this I think.
  I think that I should make a saperate module for structs and enums.
  so make a directory for models.


  I have defined the rules and the file structure in a spec, Now I should decide on the CPU struct and make a spec for that
  since I am planing on have a field of cpu being a struct, we should define the bus first.


  I am thinking that making a bus that communicates between all the interfaces and the cpu is a good idea.
  the struct for the should for now include at least the Memory. I had defined memory as a just array of u8s
  in the chip8 project, We can do the same here, but We dont actually need 4 GB of ram, we can do everything in
  about 128 MB of ram.

*** CPU structure and implementation
    @code rust
    pub struct cpu {
      pc: u32,
      reg: [u32, 32],
      bus: bus,
    }

    impl cpu {
      pub 
    }
    @end


* Technical Snags & Logic
  - *Symptom:* - *Suspected Cause:* - *Current Register State / Code Snippet:*
    @code asm
    # Paste relevant RISC-V assembly or Rust code here
    addi x1, x0, 10
    @end

* 🐇 Rabbit Holes
  - {Link to specific PDF pages of the RISC-V spec or forum threads here}
  - [ ] Need to research: 

* End of Session Reflection
  - *What works:*
  - *What's broken:*
  - *Next logical step:*

