@document.meta
title: {TODAY_DATE} - RISC-V Dev Dump
description: Informal logs and register-level troubleshooting
authors: {USER}
categories: [dev-log, riscv, low-level]
created: {TODAY_DATE}
updated: {TODAY_DATE}
version: 1.1.1
@end

* Daily Objective
  - ( ) Research on RISC-V architecture.

---

* The Brain Dump
I am starting my research on the RISC-V architecture today, excited to get into this.
RISC stands for Reduced instruction set computer, The reduce does not mean that, instructinos
are eleminated from the set, quite the opposite actually, It just states that individual instructions
in the set are simplified. The amount of work any single instruction accomplishes is reduces.
example -- at most a single data memory cycle, compared to complex instructions from CISC CPUs that
require dozens of data memory cycles in order to execute a single instruction.

I have pulled up the RISC-V specs, It is by researchers at University of California.
That document contains a lot of stuff but I am interested in the second chptr,
RV32I Base instruction set, V 2.1
This is 32-bit I think, which is easier than 64-bit, I think there is 128-bit also but not sure.

Just like the chip8 we here have to implement a fetch-decode-execute flow. But the catch is
that the instruction set is bigger(I think) and there are more components that need to talk to each other
at a faster rate.

A core is a component that contains an independent instruction fetch unit.
A RISC-V-compatible core might support multiple RISC-V-compatible hardware threads.
We can have multiple cores.

An /accelerator/ is refered to either a non-programmable fixed-function unit or a core that 
can operate autonomously but is specialized in doing a perticular task. A greate example is 
I/O accelerators, these offload I/O processing tasks from the main application cores.



* Technical Snags & Logic
  - *Symptom:* - *Suspected Cause:* - *Current Register State / Code Snippet:*
    @code asm
    # Paste relevant RISC-V assembly or Rust code here
    addi x1, x0, 10
    @end

* 🐇 Rabbit Holes
  - {Link to specific PDF pages of the RISC-V spec or forum threads here}
  - [ ] Need to research: 

* End of Session Reflection
  - *What works:*
  - *What's broken:*
  - *Next logical step:*

